---
artifact-id: STD@1777137196.ItT-3l.general-coding-guidelines
artifact-type: document
doc-type: standard
title: General coding guidelines
status: draft
version: 0.1.0
last-updated: '2026-07-05'
keywords:
- code
- coding
- guideline
- best practice
applies_to:
- developers
---

## Scope
All source code (excluding tests) produced and edited.

## Motivation
Ensure enduring software-quality for important metrics:
* (verifiable) correctness
* safety & security
* maintainability
* extensibility
* intelligibility
* observability
* performance
* testability
* expressivity

## Summary
Apply lessons from both object-oriented and functional programming: SOLID, GRASP, immutability, composability, pattern-matching, purity, ADTs, effects etc.

See requirement [Write composable, maintainable, intelligible code](../../../projects/motivation-narrative/model/motivation/requirement/REQ@1777135513.nnvsra.write-composable-maintainable-intelligible-code.md)

## Specification

* Don't be clever: readable, intelligible, composable, maintainable code that is a little longer is better than "clever" code which saves a few lines.
* Keep components focused, reasonably small, modular and pure where possible. Source code files should be no larger than 350 lines of code (hard limit, 250 soft limit). Functions should have a reasonable number of parameters (too many parameters are a design smell for violation of the single-responsibility-principle and/or for lacking encapsulation of context) and be broken up into architecturally sound composable pieces before they become overwhelming in terms of cognitive and cyclomatic complexity.
* Boolean flags changing the behavior of a function are in rare cases a necessity, but usually indicate a need for proper separation, something like the strategy-pattern and / or an architecture incorporating policies.
* Avoid explicitly using top types (e.g. `any`) unless strictly neccessary. Be specific where possible.
* Prefer expressions over statements - they are transparent & composable. 
* Prefer pattern-matching, polymorphism, strategies, dynamic dispatch, higher-order functions or similar to large control-structures.
* In particular, prefering expressions over statements and avoiding large control-structures requires trying to flatten code, avoiding deeply nested ifs, if-else-chains. Switch-case is sometimes better, especially where a language supports switch as an expression. But in general, prefer (exhaustive) pattern-matching. Also use map, flatMap, reduce, comprehensions, folds etc. where appropriate.
* Avoid too much cognitive or cyclomatic complexity in single functions or methods. Behavioral components should still be large enough to do meaningful work and avoid having to multiply call-stack depth too much, but should be broken into smaller, composable, well-typed, architecturally sound pieces before they become overwhelming (a cognitive complexity score of 15 is a good heuristic, but not dogma). 
* Use expressive typing with advanced features to reduce code, improve verifiability, safety, composability and provide high-value signals of intent to humans and AI. These include generics with proper variance, potentially f-bounded polymorphism, conditional type expressions, mapped and indexed types, products and co-products, algebraic operations, effects (or at least monadic error handling using something like Either, but preferably an effect-system), erased type-level evidence, path-dependent types, etc.. This includes NOT using imperative handling of monadic values (e.g. `isSome`), but using expressions (like `match`) instead. - but be aware of premature abstraction and unnecessary indirection.
* Correctness by construction is a high priority. Use expressive typing, architecturally sound decomposition, domain-knowledge and knowledge of formal logic, mathematics and knowledge about programming theory to achieve this.
* Use appropriate data-structures for the tasks at hand - they should be intelligible, composable, maintainable and performant where needed. Queues and stacks, hashmaps, bitmasks, packed structs, STM, state machines, workflow-nets, various graph-representations, append-only data structures, probabilistic data structures. Use simple, well-known, composable patterns where adequate and be aware of more advanced patterns where needed.
* Practice dependency inversion in order to maintain separation of concerns, modularity and ease-of-configuration.
* Always use prepared statements for database interactions. Be aware of things like cardinality-based index-field ordering, covering indices, aggregation-pipelines, windowing and CTEs, cursor-based streaming etc. Use simple, well-known patterns where adequate and be aware of the availability of more advanced patterns where needed.
* Practice the spirit of domain-driven design. Understand the problem-space and potential solution-space first. Try to find a natural partitioning into aggregate roots constituting boundaries of coherence and consistency which are enforced by the aggregate root itself. Build systems domain-outward, re-using the domain-constituents and adding to them / translating from or to them in the infrastructure, application and presentation layers, adding components there as needed in an architecturally sound manner.
* Practice expressive naming which tells a high-level, conceptual story and leaks no implementation-detail.
* Using strictly configured type-checkers and linters as well as static analysis tools (e.g. zuban & ruff, tsc and eslint etc.) to catch and partially fix certain issues automatically.
